rfc(dm): add rfc doc of enhancing task manageability (#4458)
pingcap/tiflow: dm/docs/RFCS/20220124_enhance_task_manageability.md

# Proposal: Enhance task manageability

- Author(s): [ehco](https://github.com/Ehco1996)
- Last updated: 2022-01-22

## Background

> The main purpose of this change is to address the root cause of problems like [#3771](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/3771), which are caused by the fact that DM Task itself does not distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources, making it impossible for users to intuitively manage their tasks. For this reasons, we will attempt to redesign the state machine of DM Task and optimising the DMCTL interaction interface to provide a better user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main purpose of this change is to address the root cause of problems like [#3771](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/3771), which are caused by the fact that DM task itself does not distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources, making it impossible for users to intuitively manage their tasks. For this reasons, we attempt to redesign the state machine of DM task and optimize the dmctl interface to provide a better user experience.
```
I think dmctl and others doesn't need to be capitalized

and what's "distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources"? could you explain it in comment so we can find a better way to express?

Author: The main point I was trying to make was the previous confusion between the create-task and start-task operations.
Creating a task should just create a static task configuration, it shouldn't go on to start the task

It is because `dmctl start-task` mixes up the create and start operations that we need an extra pair of operations (pause/resume)

### Current State machine of task

![dm old task lifecycle](../media/dm-old-task-lifecycle.png)

### New State machine of task

> ![dm new task lifecycle](../media/dm-new-task-lifecycle.png)

Reviewer 2: Seems we have to remove-meta for stop-task

> ![dm new task lifecycle](../media/dm-new-task-lifecycle.png)

Reviewer: "create" action should also begin from "null" state, or delete can go to black space.

"start" is placed in the line while other actions are off the line.

Reviewer: > "start" is placed in the line while other actions are off the line.

dm-old-task-lifecycle.png also has this problem

Author: fixed now

This is mainly achieved by adding a new `create task` action to create a new task in a stopped state, rather than directly creating and starting a task with `start-task` .

> ## Goals

Reviewer: please use one grammatical tense in three items below.

Author: you mean `start-task` and `create task`?

Reviewer: do/doing/did

Reviewer: ping @Ehco1996

Author: emm I don't know how to edit this sentence, I asked my English major, she said the tense of this sentence is present perfect tense

Can you suggest any changes?

> - Organize and optimize the state machine of tasks for better management

Reviewer: I really doubt if users also think it's better that there's no longer one command to let a task run.

- Unified style of commands in DMCTL, optimized DMCTL interaction experience

> - Adding/modifying OpenAPI, enhance peripheral eco-tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adding/modifying OpenAPI, enhance eco-tools
```

## Design and Examples

New syntax of dmctl is `dmctl [resource type] [command] [flags]`

> where command, `resource type`, `command` and `flags` are:

Reviewer: https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/4458#discussion_r791629122

?

> where command, `resource type` , `command` , and `flags` are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `resource type`, `command` and `flags` are:
```

| update  | `dmctl task update --config-file="dm.yaml"`                                                                                                   | --config-file                                                                  | update a stopped task with config file.                                  |
| delete  | `dmctl task delete --task-name="test" --yes`                                                                                                  | --task-name, --yes                                                             | delete a not running task and remove all meta data for this task.        |
| get     | `dmctl task get --task-name="test" --output="new_task.yaml"`                                                                                  | --task-name, --output                                                          | show the task config in yaml format, also support output to file.        |

> | list    | `dmctl task list --status="running" --source="source1,source2"`                                                                               | --status, --source                                                             | list all tasks in current cluster, support filter by status and sources. |

Reviewer 3: prefer `--stage="running"`

suppose we want to get `status` of tasks of stage `running`, it's wield to use `status --status=running`

although there's no such filter for task, but there's one for validation.

| ------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| start   | `dmctl relay start --source-name="source1.yaml" --worker-name="worker1"`                                                                | --source-name, --worker-name          | start relay for a source on a worker.                                        |
| stop    | `dmctl relay stop --source-name="source1.yaml" --worker-name="worker1"`                                                                 | --source-name, --worker-name          | stop relay for a source on a worker.                                         |
| pause   | `dmctl relay pause --source-name="source1.yaml" --worker-name="worker1"`                                                                | --source-name, --worker-name          | pause relay for a source on a worker.                                        |

> | resume  | `dmctl relay resume --source-name="source1.yaml" --worker-name="worker1"`                                                               | --source-name, --worker-name          | resume relay for a source on a worker.                                       |

Reviewer 4: Does pause/resume nessary?

> | resume  | `dmctl relay resume --source-name="source1.yaml" --worker-name="worker1"`                                                               | --source-name, --worker-name          | resume relay for a source on a worker.                                       |

Reviewer 4: Is pause/resume necessary?

Author: i thinks not, removed in https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/4458/commits/599193432235e57590bfd0837d6425ceda237674

| member list                | `dmctl member list --name="master-1" --role="master/worker/leader"` | --name, --role | show members of current cluster by name and role. |
| member offline             | `dmctl member offline --name="master-1"`                            | --name         | offline members of current cluster by name.       |
| member evict-leader        | `dmctl member evict-leader --name="master-1"`                       | --name         | evict leader for master node.                     |
| member cancel-evict-leader | `dmctl member cancel-evict-leader --name="master-1"`                | --name         | cancel evict leader for master node.              |

### Optimised dmctl for interaction mode (optional)

The current interaction of dmctl still has room for optimization, and I hope to take this opportunity to do some optimization of the interaction experience, focusing on the user can quickly select the command they want to enter through the keyboard, instead of entering commands by their memory.

Here is a simple prototype demo:

> [![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/AVnOlghSu5d0YqjdOw9iruFdW.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/AVnOlghSu5d0YqjdOw9iruFdW)

Reviewer 2: this recording has been archived... I think you can push the SVG also.

Author: thx  added in https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/4458/commits/4aabce25879b45688ca0fd760744fb646ade9510

## Breaking Changes for OpenAPI

- `POST /api/v1/tasks` will be changed from creating and starting tasks to only creating tasks.
- `DELETE /api/v1/tasks/{task-name}` will be changed from stopping task to stopping task and delete the meta data.
- `POST /api/v1/tasks/{task-name}/pause` will be updated to `POST /api/v1/tasks/{task-name}/stop`
- `POST /api/v1/tasks/{task-name}/resume` will be updated to `POST /api/v1/tasks/{task-name}/start`
- `POST /api/v1/sources/{source-name}/pause-relay` will be deleted
- `POST /api/v1/sources/{source-name}/resume-relay` will be deleted

## Milestones

### Milestone 1 - Implementation of the modified task state machine according to the design documentation

This phase is mainly about implementing the DM-Master/DM-Worker internal logic.

> For tasks, the DM-Master's internal scheduling module needs to support the creation of a subtask in a stopped state, in addition to adapting additional parameters like `-start-time`,`--time-out` and so on.

Reviewer 3: > For tasks, the DM-Master's internal scheduling module needs to support the creation of a subtask in a stopped state

what happens to the stopped subtask? user may easily override existing task(stopped)

# Proposal: Enhance task manageability

- Author(s): [ehco](https://github.com/Ehco1996)
- Last updated: 2022-01-22

## Background

> The main purpose of this change is to address the root cause of problems like [#3771](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/3771), which are caused by the fact that DM task itself does not distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources, making it impossible for users to intuitively manage their tasks. For this reasons, we will attempt to redesign the state machine of DM task and optimize the dmctl interaction interface to provide a better user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main purpose of this change is to address the root cause of problems like [#3771](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/3771), which are caused by the fact that commands about DM task do not distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources, making it impossible for users to intuitively manage their tasks. For this reasons, we will attempt to redesign the state machine of DM task and optimize the dmctl interaction interface to provide a better user experience.
```

### Current State machine of task

![dm old task lifecycle](../media/dm-old-task-lifecycle.png)

### New State machine of task

![dm new task lifecycle](../media/dm-new-task-lifecycle.png)

This is mainly achieved by adding a new command `dmctl task create`, which creates a stopped task instead of creating and starting a new task with single command `dmctl start-task`.

## Goals

- Organize and optimize the state machine of tasks for better management

> - Unified style of commands in dmctl, optimized dmctl interaction experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unify style of commands in dmctl and optimize dmctl interaction experience
```

> - Adding/modifying OpenAPI, enhance eco-tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add/modify OpenAPI, enhance eco-tools
```

## Design and Examples

New syntax of dmctl is `dmctl [resource type] [command] [flags]`

where `resource type`, `command` and `flags` are:

> - `resource type`: Specifies the resource you want to control. resource types are case-insensitive and there are limited resource types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `resource type`: Specifies the resource you want to control. Resource types are case-insensitive and there are limited resource types.
```

> there are limited resource types

I'm expecting to read the name of types after this sentence, otherwise it's nonsense and should be removed.

> - `command`: Specifies the operation that you want to perform on one or more resources, for example `create` , `get` , `update` , `delete` , `etc` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `command`: Specifies the operation that you want to perform on one or more resources, for example `create`, `get` , `update` , `delete` , `etc` .
```

and rest place

> - `flags`: Specifies optional flags. For example, you can use the `--master-addr` flags to specify the address and port of the DM-Master server. note that we **not allow** any non-keyword arguments, all arguments must be specified as this: `--flag value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `flags`: Specifies optional flags. For example, you can use the `--master-addr` flags to specify the address and port of the DM-Master server. Note that we **do not allow** any non-keyword arguments. All arguments must be specified as this: `--flag value`.
```

please use some grammar checker

> All arguments must be specified as this: `--flag value`

There maybe some boolean flags like `--remove-meta`, I'm not sure we will change it.

> - `flags`: Specifies optional flags. For example, you can use the `--master-addr` flags to specify the address and port of the DM-Master server. Note that we **not allow** any non-keyword arguments, All arguments must be specified as this: `--flag value`.

Author: since a explicit call would be more intuitive than an implicit call, so i think `--remove-meta=ture`  is better than `--meta`?

wait for other reviewers cc @lance6716

Author: ping @lance6716 😬

Reviewer 5: I'm more likely to prefer the former one. But `--remove-meta=true` looks a bit redundant because setting `--remove-meta` flag is sufficiently intuitive to express the semantics that users would like to remove the metadata (nobody would think setting this flag is about to preserve the metadata😂) . `--remove-meta` would be better.

Author: u are right, we should keep `--remove-meta` beacuse some paramters like`remove-meta` can have default value
but i still want to remove support for non-keyword args 

e.g:
```
dmctl task start --task-name="test" --remove-meta   ✔
dmctl task start test --remove-meta   ❌
```

Reviewer: cc @sunzhaoyang . The object of a command does not need to be put in a flag IMO.

Reviewer 4: agree.  I believe "task start [--some-flags] <object>" is better. We should not mix flags and object.

Author: remove the change now, patl @lance6716 

https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/4458/commits/11b6487444036d0f4033ab91dbfc376d4b2e5910

## Background

The main purpose of this change is to address the root cause of problems like [#3771](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/3771), which are caused by the fact that commands about DM task do not distinguish between dynamic configuration and static resources, making it impossible for users to intuitively manage their tasks. For this reasons, we will attempt to redesign the state machine of DM task and optimize the dmctl interaction interface to provide a better user experience.

### Current State machine of task

![dm old task lifecycle](../media/dm-old-task-lifecycle.png)

### New State machine of task

![dm new task lifecycle](../media/dm-new-task-lifecycle.png)

This is mainly achieved by adding a new command `dmctl task create`, which creates a stopped task instead of creating and starting a new task with single command `dmctl start-task`.

## Goals

- Organize and optimize the state machine of tasks for better management
- Unify style of commands in dmctl and optimize dmctl interaction experience
- Add/modify OpenAPI, enhance eco-tools

## Design and Examples

New syntax of dmctl is `dmctl [resource type] [command] [flags] [arguments]`

> where `resource type`, `command` and `flags` are:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
where `resource type`, `command`, `flags` and `arguments` are:
```

> - `resource type`: Specifies the resource you want to control. resource types are case-insensitive and there are limited resource types. currently there are only these types of resource types: `task`, `source`, `relay`, `ddl-lock` and `member`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `resource type` specifies the resource you want to control. `resource type`s are case-insensitive and limited. Currently there are only these: `task`, `source`, `relay`, `ddl-lock` and `member`.
```

> - `command`: Specifies the operation that you want to perform on one or more resources, for example `create`, `get`, `update`, `delete`, `etc`.
> 
> - `flags`: Specifies optional flags. For example, you can use the `--master-addr` flags to specify the address and port of the DM-Master server.
> 
> - `arguments`: Specifies the required arguments for this command, such as the name of the `task` and task config file.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `command` specifies the operation that you want to perform on one or more resources, for example `create`, `get`, `update`, `delete`, etc.

- `flags` specifies optional flags. For example, you can use the `--master-addr` flags to specify the address and port of the DM-Master server.

- `arguments` specifies the required arguments for this command, such as the name of the `task` and task config file.
```

### dmctl commands for Task

> | command | Full Syntax Example                                                                                                              | Flags                                                             | Description                                                              |

Reviewer: reader can see the flags from example, no need to repeat them again, it doesn't give more information.

|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| check   | `dmctl task check --config-file=dm.yaml --error-count=1 --warn-count=1 <task-name>`                                              | --config-file, --error-count, --warn-count                        | check the task config yaml file.                                         |

> | create  | `dmctl task create --config-file="dm.yaml"`                                                                                      | --config-file                                                     | create a stopped task with config file.                                  |

Reviewer: I prefer `dmctl task create "dm.yaml"` 🤔 it more looks like the object of `create`

Author: addressed in https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/4458/commits/3d537a338aab8c5fbd6f6a5c0a080cf170f2edb6

alse added default value for flags

> | update  | `dmctl task update --config-file="dm.yaml <task-name>"`                                                                          | --config-file                                                     | update a stopped task with config file.                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| update  | `dmctl task update --config-file="dm.yaml" <task-name>`                                                                          | --config-file                                                     | update a stopped task with config file.                                  |
```

does this flags can be omitted? What's the behaviour then? (because I can see the syntax of this command and treat every flags optional by default)

> | delete  | `dmctl task delete --yes --force=true <task-name>`                                                                               | --yes, --force                                                    | delete a task and remove all meta data for this task.                    |

Reviewer: I prefer `--force` rather than `--force=true`, because there's no difference with `--force=false` and omitting it.

| get     | `dmctl task get --output="new_task.yaml" <task-name>`                                                                            | --output                                                          | show the task config in yaml format, also support output to file.        |

> | list    | `dmctl task list --stage="Running" --source="source1,source2"`                                                                   | --stage, --source                                                 | list all tasks in current cluster, support filter by status and sources. |

Reviewer: need to mention the syntax of source filter

> | list    | `dmctl task list --stage="Running" --source="source1,source2"`                                                                      | --source, --stage                                                                |                        | list all tasks in current cluster.                                |

Reviewer 6: I think `--stage` is a limited option, such as running, stopped, paused, etc.

It is better to list them here.

Author: added but hard to add explanations for all the args, but this work will done in the pr of doc

| status  | `dmctl task status --source="source1,source2" <task-name>`                                                                       | --source                                                          | show task detail status.                                                 |

> | start   | `dmctl task start --source="source1,source2" --remove-meta --start-time="2021-01-01 00:00:00" --safe-mode-time="1s" <task-name>` | --status, --source, --remove-meta, --start-time, --safe-mode-time | start a stopped task with many flags.                                    |

Reviewer: your PR is safe-mode-duration?

> | list    | `dmctl task list --stage="Running" --source="source1,source2"`                                                                      | --source(default: ""), --stage(default: "")                                                                             |                        | list all tasks in current cluster.                                |

Reviewer: the format of `--source` is comma separated? please write it

Author: i thinks this is rfc, i can't pull all details about all the commands and flags or args 😭, (not easy to write this in markdone table)

more details will be added in docs

> | stop    | `dmctl task stop --source="source1,source2" --timeout="60 s" <task-name>`                                                        | --source, --timeout                                               | stop a running task with many flags.                                     |

Reviewer: do we support space in `60 s`?

### dmctl commands for Source

| Command  | Full Syntax Example                                | Flags                   | Arguments                | Description                                                         |
|----------|----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| create   | `dmctl source create source1.yaml`                 |                         | config-file              | create source with config file.                                     |
| update   | `dmctl source update source1 source1.yaml`         |                         | source-name, config-file | update a source with config file.                                   |

> | delete   | `dmctl source delete --force source1`              | --force(default: false) | source-name              | delete a source with config file.                                   |

Reviewer 6: `Full Syntax Example`, `Arguments` is conflict with `Description`

| get      | `dmctl source get --output="source1.yaml" source1` | --output                | source-name              | show the source config in yaml format, also support output to file. |

> | list     | `dmctl source list`                                |                         |                          | list all source in current cluster.                                 |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| list     | `dmctl source list`                                |                         |                          | list all sources in current cluster.                                 |
```

> | get      | `dmctl source get --output="source1.yaml" source1` | --output(default: ".")  | source-name              | show the source config in yaml format, also support output to file. |

Reviewer: default `.` means we always write a file to current directory, but what's the filename?

Also it not "also support output to file" because there's no alternative to output to file

Author: update some default value to `can be omitted`

>  because there's no alternative to output to file

it can be printed on screen

Reviewer: “optional” means "can be omitted", no need to repeat it.

| enable   | `dmctl source enable source1`                      |                         | source-name              | enable a disabled source.                                           |
| disable  | `dmctl source disable source1`                     |                         | source-name              | disable a source and also stop the running subtasks of this source. |
| transfer | `dmctl source transfer source1 worker1`            |                         | source-name, worker-name | transfers a source to a free worker.                                |

### dmctl commands for Relay

| Command | Full Syntax Example                                                                                 | Flags                      | Arguments              | Description                                                                  |
|---------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | start   | `dmctl relay start --worker-name="worker1" source1`                                                 | --worker-name(default: "") | source-name            | start relay for a source on a worker.                                        |

Reviewer: we need to state that if worker-name is empty, we start relay at bound worker of this source

Author: also will be add in doc

| stop    | `dmctl relay stop --worker-name="worker1" source1`                                                  | --worker-name(default: "") | source-name            | stop relay for a source on a worker.                                         |

> | purge   | `dmctl relay purge --sub-dir="2ae76434-f79f-11e8-bde2-024ac130008.000001" source1 mysql-bin.000006` | --sub-dir(default: "")     | source-name, file-name | purges relay log files of the DM-worker according to the specified filename. |

Reviewer: we have time-based purge in my memory :thinking:

Author: don't know why not support now https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/blob/9858cb8e630b3020fde3bf160bab1a97d6ee988d/dm/dm/ctl/master/purge_relay.go#L106

### dmctl commands for DDL-LOCK

| Command | Full Syntax Example                 | Flags | Arguments          | Description                                  |
|---------|-------------------------------------|-------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| list    | `dmctl ddl-lock list task1`         |       | task-name          | show shard-ddl locks information for a task. |

> | unlock  | `dmctl ddl-lock unlock task1 lock1` |       | task-name, lock-id | force unlock un-resolved DDL locks.          |

Reviewer: in my memory the task-name is a part of lock-id, currently the `unlock-ddl-lock` command doesn't need task name

### dmctl commands for member

| Command                    | Full Syntax Example                                   | Flags          | Arguments          | Description                                       |
|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------|

> | member list                | `dmctl member list --name="master-1" --role="master"` | --name, --role |                    | show members of current cluster by name and role. |

Reviewer 6: `--role` ditto

> | member list                | `dmctl member list --name="master-1" --role="master"` | --name, --role |                    | show members of current cluster by name and role. |
> | member offline             | `dmctl member offline master-1`                       |                | master/worker-name | offline members of current cluster by name.       |
> | member evict-leader        | `dmctl member evict-leader master-1`                  |                | master-name        | evict leader for master node.                     |
> | member cancel-evict-leader | `dmctl member cancel-evict-leader master-1`           |                | master-name        | cancel evict leader for master node.              |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| list                | `dmctl member list --name="master-1" --role="master"` | --name, --role |                    | show members of current cluster by name and role. |
| offline             | `dmctl member offline master-1`                       |                | master/worker-name | offline members of current cluster by name.       |
| evict-leader        | `dmctl member evict-leader master-1`                  |                | master-name        | evict leader for master node.                     |
| cancel-evict-leader | `dmctl member cancel-evict-leader master-1`           |                | master-name        | cancel evict leader for master node.              |
```

Unified format

> | member offline             | `dmctl member offline --master-1`                     |                                          | master/worker-name | offline members of current cluster by name.       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| member offline             | `dmctl member offline master-1`                     |                                          | master/worker-name | offline members of current cluster by name.       |
```

> ### Optimised dmctl for interaction mode (optional)

Reviewer: you have used "optimization" which is America spelling, but "Optimised" is British spelling

> ### Optimized  dmctl for interaction mode (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optimized dmctl for interaction mode (optional)
```

The current interaction of dmctl still has room for optimization, and I hope to take this opportunity to do some optimization of the interaction experience, focusing on the user can quickly select the command they want to enter through the keyboard, instead of entering commands by their memory.

Here is a simple prototype demo:

> ![dmctl](../media/new-dmctl.svg)

Reviewer: PTAL at this demo @sunzhaoyang

Author: it's an optional work ( if i  have enough time) 😂
